 UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST 
COLLEGE OF DISTANCE EDUCATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE TITLE: 
ACC 403D Audit and Internal Review  
 
©   COLLEGE OF DISTANCE EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST 
CODE PUBLICATIONS, 2019   
ACC 403D AUDIT AND 
INTERNAL REVIEW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Augustine Addo 
Prof. Edward Marfo-Yiadom 
Dr. Clement Lamboi Arthur 
  First published in 2021 by UCC Press, Cape Coast 
Second publication in 2022 by Technick’s Ware Services 
 
 
 
 
 
© COLLEGE OF DISTANCE EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST (CoDEUCC) 
2021, 2022 
  
 
 
 
ISBN 978–9988–8465–1-0 
 
 
 
  
First Publication, 2021 
 
 
 
  
 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication should be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system or transmitted by any form or means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying or otherwise without the prior permission of the 
copyright holder. 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover illustrated by William Jacobs 
 
 
 
  
 
   
ABOUT THIS BOOK 
 
CoDEUCC/ Bachelor of Commerce                                                                              i 
 
This Course Book “ACC 403D  Audit and Internal Review ” has 
been exclusively written by experts in the discipline to up -date your 
general knowledge in Business  in order to equip you with the basic 
tool you will require for your professional training as an accountant 
and administrator. 
 
This three -credit course book of thirty -six (36) sessions has been 
structured to reflect the weekly three-hour lecture for this course in the 
University.  Thus, each session is equivalent to a one -hour lecture on 
campus.  As a  distance learner, however, you are expected to spend a 
minimum of three hours and a maximum of five hours on each 
session. 
 
To help you do this effectively, a Study Guide has been particularly 
designed to show you how this book can be used.  In this study guide, 
your weekly schedules are clearly spelt out as well as dates for 
quizzes, assignments and examinations. 
 
Also included in this book is a list of all symbols and their meanings.  
They are meant to draw your attention to vital issues of concern and 
activities you are expected to perform. 
 
Blank sheets have been also inserted for your comments on topics that 
you may find difficult. Remember to bring these to the attention of 
your course tutor during your face-to-face meetings. 
 
We wish you a happy and successful study. 
 
 
     Mr. Augustine Addo 
     Prof. Edward Marfo-Yiadom 
Dr. Clement Lamboi Arthur 
 
    
    
    
 
 
   INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM 
 
CoDEUCC/Bachelor of Commerce 207 
UNIT 4 
SESSION 4 
 
SESSION 4:  TESTS OF CONTROL 
 
We are now in session 4 of unit 4.  In this session, we are going to look at 
specific tests of control s that the auditor can apply to  assess the extent of 
compliance with internal control systems. 
 
Objectives 
At the end of the session, you should be able to list the specific test of control 
appropriate for various areas in the income cycle. 
 
Now read on…  
 
4.1 Tests of Control Relating to Sales System 
Tests of Control should be designed to check that the control procedures a re being 
applied and that objectives are being achieved. Tests may be appropriate under the 
following broad headings 
 
4.1.1 Sequence Test Checks 
• Carry out sequence test checks on invoices, credit notes, dispatch notes and 
orders.  Ensure that all items are included and that there are no omissions or 
duplications. 
 
4.1.2 Authorisation 
Check the authorisation for the: 
•  Acceptance   of the order (credit-worthiness check) 
• Discounts applied to orders 
•  Dispatch of goods 
• Raising of the invoice or credit notes 
• Pricing and discounts 
• Write-off of bad debts 
• Check that the relevant signature exists and that the control has been 
applied, e.g. check pricing for accuracy and credit limits to ensure that they 
have not been exceeded.  This last test will also serve as a substantive 
procedure. 
 
4.1.3 Evidence of checking   of the arithmetical accuracy of: 
• Invoices, 
• Credit notes 
• VAT/NHIL 
   TESTS OF CONTROL  
                                                            CoDEUCC/Bachelor of Commerce 208 
UNIT 4 
SESSION 4 
This is often done by means of a grid stamp, containing several signatures on the face of 
the invoice.  Ensure that the control has in fact b een applied by checking the accuracy 
of such invoices and credit notes.  This last test will also serve as a substantive 
procedure.  
 
4.1.4 Arithmetical Accuracy 
Seek evidence of checking of the arithmetical accuracy of: 
• Invoices 
• Credit notes 
• VAT 
 
This is often done by means of a ‘grid stamp’ containing several signatures on the face 
of the invoice.  Ensure that the control has in fact been applied by checking the 
accuracy   of such invoices and retail notes.  This last test will also serve as a 
substantive procedure. 
 
4.1.5 Dispatch Notes 
• Check dispatch notes and notes and goods returned notes to ensure that they are 
referenced to invoices and credit notes and vice versa. 
 
4.1.6 Control Account Reconciliations 
• Check that control account reconciliations have been performed and reviewed 
• Re-perform the control by checking the reconciliation to source documentation 
• Ensure that batch total controls have been applied by seeking signatures and 
tracing batches from inputs to output. 
• Check that exceptions and managem ent information reporting on sales have 
been produced and reviewed, with evidence of action sales on unusual trends or 
level of discounts or unusual prices. 
• In all cases, tests should be performed on a sample basis.  The auditor should 
investigate errors and consider the need for further testing to obtain comfort on 
the proper application of the control procedure.  
 
4.2 Tests of Control Relating to Purchasing System 
Tests of control should be drawn up so as to check that control procedures are being 
applied and to achieve control objectives 
• Test for evidence of a sequence check   of purchase order 
• Test for evidence of approval of PO 
• Test for adherence to authority limits in respect of PO 
• Test for evidence of sequence check of GRN 
• Check for evidence of a sequence check of goods returns note 
• Test for serial numbering of purchase invoice   INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM 
 
CoDEUCC/Bachelor of Commerce 209 
UNIT 4 
SESSION 4 
 
• Test for evidence of a sequence check of purchase invoice 
• Test for evidence of matching purchase invoices with   goods received note 
• Test for evidence of checking casts, extensions and VAT treatment 
• Test for approval purchase invoice for further processing 
• Test for evidence of matching credit notes to goods returned note 
• Test for evidence of authorization of adjustments to purchase ledger  
• Test for evidence of authorization of adjustments to purchase ledger listing 
 
4.3 Tests of Control Relating to Payroll System 
The programme of tests should ensure that the following key controls are in existence 
and working efficiently: 
• Employees can be paid only for work done. 
• Employees are paid at the correct rate. 
• Errors cannot occur in the calculation of the payroll or the deductions from 
gross pay. 
 
A suggested programme of tests of control is as follows: 
• Test sample of time sheet, clock cards or other records, for approval by 
responsible official. Pay particular attention to the approval of overtime. 
• Test authority for payment of causal labour, particularly if in cash. 
• Observe wage distribution for adherence to procedures ensuring 
employees sign for wages, that unclaimed wages re-banked, etc. 
• Test authourisation for payroll amendments by reference to personnel 
records. 
• Test control over payroll amendments. 
• Examine evidence of checking of payroll calculation (e.g. a signature of 
the financial controller). 
• Examine evidence of approval of payroll by a responsible official. 
• Examine evidence of independent checks of payrolls (e.g. by internal 
audit). 
• Inspect payroll reconciliations