 First printed in 2005 by University Printing Press, Cape Coast 
This fourth publication in 2010 by Mercury Press, Accra 
This fifth publication in 2011 by Agol Ghana Ltd, Accra 
This sixth publication in 2012 by Agol Ghana Ltd, Accra 
Printed in 2017 by University Printing Press, Cape Coast 
Printed in 2018 by Ajumakoman Press, Takoradi 
Printed in 2019 by UCC Press, Cape Coast 
 
 
 
 
© COLLEGE OF DISTANCE EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST (CoDEUCC) 
2006, 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2017, 2018, 2019 
 
 
 
 
ISBN 978-9988-8467-3-2 
 
 
 
First Published 2005 
 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication should be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted by any form or means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise without the prior 
permission of the copyright holder. 
 
 
 
 
Illustrated by R. Y. Essiam 
 
 
 
Printed and bound in Ghana by ............................................ 
 
 
   
ABOUT THIS BOOK 
 
 
This Course Book “Entrepreneurship ” has been exclusively written by experts in 
the discipline to up- date your general knowledge of English Language in order to 
equip you with the basic tool you will require for your professional work as a   
teacher and an administrator. 
 
This three-credit course book of thirty-six (36) sessions has been structured to reflect 
the weekly three-hour lecture for this course in the University.  Thus, each session is 
equivalent to a one-hour lecture on campus.  As a distance learner, however, you are 
expected to spend a minimum of three hours and a maximum of five hours on each 
session. 
 
To help you do this effectively, a Study Guide has been particularly designed to 
show you how this book can be used.  In this study guide, your weekly schedules are 
clearly spelt out as well as dates for quizzes, assignments and examinations. 
 
Also included in this book is a list of all symbols and their meanings.  They are 
meant to draw your attention to vital issues of concern and activities you are 
expected to perform. 
 
Blank sheets have been also inserted for your comments on topics that you may find 
difficult. Remember to bring these to the attention of your course tutor during your 
face-to-face meetings. 
 
We wish you a happy and successful study. 
 
 
Prof. Mrs, Rosemond Boohene  
Prof. Boakye Mensah 
    
    
    
    
 
 
 
CoDEUCC/ Post-Diploma  in Commerce and Management Studies  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
It has become a tradition in academic circles to acknowledge the assistance one 
received from colleagues in the writing of an academic document. Those who 
contributed in diverse ways toward the production of this particular course book 
merit more than mere acknowledgement for two main reasons. First, they worked 
beyond their normal limits in writing, editing and providing constant support and 
encouragement without which the likelihood of giving up the task was very high. 
Second, the time span for the writing and editing of this particular course book was 
so short that their exceptional commitment and dedication were the major factors 
that contributed to its accomplishment. 
 
It is in the foregoing context that the names of Prof. Mrs, Rosemond Boohene and 
Prof. Boakye Mensah  of University of Cape Coast, who wrote and edited the 
content of this course book for CoDEUCC, will ever remain in the annals of the 
College. This special remembrance also applies to those who assisted me in the final 
editing of the document. 
 
I wish to thank the Vice -Chancellor, Prof. Joseph Ghartey-  Ampiah and the Pro-
Vice-Chancellor, Prof. Dora Edu- Buandoh and all the staff of the University’s 
Administration without whose diverse support this course book would not have been 
completed. 
 
Finally, I am greatly indebted to the entire staff of CoDEUCC, especially Francis 
Eshun for shaping the scripts. 
 
Any limitations in this course book, however, are exclusively mine. But the good 
comments must be shared among those named above. 
 
 
Prof. Isaac Galyuon 
                                                                        (Provost) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viii   
                                    TABLE OF CONTENT  
 
 
PAGE 
 
About This Book  …. ….  ….  …..  ….                   
 i 
 
Acknowledgement  … … …. …. …      ii 
 
Table of Content  … … … … …                
 iii 
 
Symbols and Their Meaning … … … …               
 vii 
 
UNIT 1: ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMALL BUSNIESS  
         MANAGEMENT      … … … 1 
 
SESSION 1: The Nature and Development of Entrepreneurship … …
 3  
1.1 The Evolution of Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship  … 3
  
1.2 Definition of Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship  … 4
  
1.3 Types of Entrepreneurs    … … 5 
1.4 Reasons Why People become Entrepreneurs … … 6 
 
       2: The Entrepreneurial Personality   ... … 9 
 2.1 Definition of Personality    … … 9 
 2.2 The entrepreneur’s Role in Business  … … 9 
 2.3 Characteristics of Successful Entrepreneurs … … 10 
 
3: The Entrepreneurial Process    … … 13 
 3.1 The Entrepreneurial process   … … 13 
 3.2 Factors that Influence the Entrepreneurial Process … 14 
 
4: Entrepreneurship and the Environment  … … 17 
 4.1 Economic Environment    … … 17 
 4.2 Technological Environment   … … 18 
 4.3 Political Environment    … … 18 
 4.4 Legal Environment    … … 18 
 4.5 Socio-cultural Environment   … … 18 
 4.6 Competitive Environment    … … 19 
 
5: Advantages and Disadvantages of Entrepreneurship … … 21 
 5.1 Advantages of Entrepreneurship   … … 21 
 5.2 Disadvantages of Entrepreneurship  … … 22 
 
CoDEUCC Post Diploma Degree in Basic Studies 1  MANAGING RESOURCES      
 
 
UNIT 4 
OUTLINE 
UNIT 4: MANAGING RESOURCES 
 
UNIT OUTLINE 
Session 1: Nature and Types of Resources 
Session 2: Operating Resources 
Session 3: Informational Resources 
Session 4: Human Resource 
Session 5: Technological Resources 
Session 6: Local Resource Mobilization 
 
 
You are warmly welcome to this unit on resources. I guess you all 
know the importance of resources to both the entrepreneur and small 
business owner. R esources comprise stocks of knowledge, physical 
assets, human capital, and other tangible and intangible factors that a business owns and 
controls, and which enable it to produce efficient and/or effective market offerings. In 
this unit we will discuss the nature, types and importance of resources for small firms.   
 
Unit Objectives 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 
a. explain the term ‘firm resources’ 
b. describe the various types of resources 
c. state four importance of firm resources  
d. examine the fundamental consideration in choosing and improving facilities 
e. explain how firms can mobilize local resources 
 
 
Enjoy your reading… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CoDEUCC Post-Diploma Degree in Commerce/Management Studies 99           MANAGING RESOURCES 
 
UNIT 4 
OUTLINE 
This is a blank sheet for your short notes on; 
• Issues that are not clear; and 
• Difficult topics, if any 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                   CoDEUCC Post-Diploma Degree in Commerce/Management Studies 100  MANAGING RESOURCES      
 
    
UNIT 4 
SESSION 1 
SESSION 1: MEANING AND NATURE OF FIRM RESOURCES 
 
Firm resources are one of the most important ingredients for the survival 
of every firm. Firms usually take advantage of financial resources, access 
to markets, geographical locations, physical resources, employee 
efficiency, quality of customer service, uniqueness of products, and 
operations efficiency as basis for their competitive advantage. This session will examine 
briefly the nature , characteristics  and types of resources available to the entrepreneur 
and small firms. 
 
Objectives 
By the end of this session, you should be able to: 
a) define firm resources; 
b) list the characteristics of firm resources;  
c) state the qualities of a firm’s competitive resources; and 
d) mention and explain briefly the types of firm resources. 
  
Read on… 
 
1.1   Nature 