UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST 
COLLEGE OF DISTANCE EDUCATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE TITLE: 
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©   COLLEGE OF DISTANCE EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST 
CODE PUBLICATIONS, 2019  First printed in 2019 by University of Cape Coast Press  
 
 
 
 
©   COLLEGE OF DISTANCE EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY OF CAPE COAST 
(CoDE UCC), 2019 
 
  
 
 
 
CoDE PUBLICATIONS, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All right reserved.  No part of this publication should be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system or transmitted by any form or means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying or otherwise without the prior permission of the copyright holder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover page illustrated by Enoch Mbroh 
 
 
 
 
 
  ABOUT THIS BOOK  
This Course Book “Introduction to Project Management ” has been exclusively 
written by expe rts in the discipline to up -date your general knowledge of Business in 
order to equip you with the basic tool you will require for your professional training as a 
teacher and an administrator. 
 
This three-credit course book of t hirty-six (36) sessions has been structured to reflect 
the weekly t hree-hour lecture for this course in the University.  Thus, e ach session is 
equivalent to a one -hour lecture on campus.  As a distance learner, however, you are 
expected to spend a minimum of three hours and a maximum of five hours on each 
session. 
 
To help you do this effectively, a Study Guide has been particularly designed to show 
you how this book can be used.  In this study g uide, your weekly schedules are clearly 
spelt out as well as dates for quizzes, assignments and examinations. 
  
Also included in this book is a list of all symbols and their meanings. They are meant to 
draw your attention to vital issues of concern and activities you are expected to perform. 
 
Blank sheets have been also inserted for your comments on topics that you may find 
difficult.  Remember to bring these to the attention of your course tutor during your 
face-to-face meetings. 
 
We wish you a happy and successful study. 
 
Edmond Yeboah Nyamah 
Adwoa Yeboah Owusu Yeboah 
 
CoDEUCC/Bachelor of Commerce 
 
i  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
It has become a tradition in academic circles to acknowledge the assistance one 
received from colleagues in the writing of an academic document. Those who 
contributed in diverse ways toward the production of this particular course book merit 
more than mere  acknowledgement for two main reasons. First, they worked beyond 
their normal limits in writing, editing and providing constant support and 
encouragement without which the likelihood of giving up the task was very high. 
Second, the time span for the writing and editing of this particular course book was so 
short that their exceptional commitment and dedication were the major factors that 
contributed to its accomplishment. 
 
It is in the foregoing context that the names of Edmond Yeboah Nyamah and Adwoa 
Yeboah Owusu Yeboah of University of Cape Coast, who wrote and edited the content 
of this course book for CoDEUCC, will ever remain in the annals of the College. This 
special remembrance also applies to those who assisted me in the final editing of the 
document. 
 
I wish to thank the Vice -Chancellor, Prof
. Joseph Ghartey -Ampiah and the Pro- Vice-
Chancellor, Prof. Dora Edu- Buandoh and all the staff of the University’s 
Administration without whose diverse support this course book would not have been 
completed. 
 
Finally, I am greatly indebted to the entire staff of CoDEUCC, especially Mrs. Christina 
Hesse for formatting the scripts. 
 
Any limitations in this course book, however, are exclusively mine. But the good 
comments must be shared among those named above. 
 
 
Prof. Isaac Galyuon 
                                                                       (Provost) 
 
 
 
   CoDEUCC/
 Bachelor of Commerce 
 
ii  TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Content                          Page 
 
About this Book ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... i 
Acknowledgement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ii 
Table of Contents ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... iii 
Symbols and their Meanings ... ... ... ... ... ... vii 
    
UNIT 1: NATURE OF PROJECT AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT  
Session 1:  Nature of a Project 
1.1 What is Project? … … … … … 3 
1.2 Characteristic of a Project  … … … … 4 
1.3 Examples of Projects  … … … … … 4 
1.4  Starting and Ending a Project  … … … 5 
1.5  Importance of Projects  … … … … 5 
Session 2:  Project Management Overview … … … … 7 
2.1  Project Management Defined … … … … 7 
2.2 Steps to manage a project … … … … 7 
2.3  Why Project and Project Management … … 8 
2.4  Constrains to project Management … … … 8 
Session 3:  Project Governance, Project Managers Roles and  
Responsibilities … … … … … … 11 
3.1 Project Governance … … … … … 11 
3.2  Project Stakeholders … … … … … 12 
3.3  Project Sponsors Responsibilities … … … 12 
3.4  Role of the Project Manager … … … … 13 
Session 4:  Project Conflict and Resolutions … … … … 15 
4.1 Project Conflict … … … … … 15 
4.2  Types of Projects Conflicts … … … … 15 
4.3  Conflict Resolution Approaches … … … 16 
Session 5:  Project Life Cycle … … … … … … 19 
5.1  Project life cycle defined … … … … 19 
Session 6:  Project Delays  … … … … … … 23 
6.1 Project Delays … … … … … … 23 
6.2 Types of Delays in Projects … … … … 23 
6.3 Causes of Project Delays … … … … … 25 
 
 
 
 
 
CoDEUCC/Bachelor of Commerce 
 
iii  PROJECT HUMAN RESOURCE AND  
COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT  
 
 
UNIT 4 
UNIT 4: PROJECT HUMAN RESOURCE AND 
COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT 
 
Unit Outline 
Session 1: Project Human resource Management 
Session 2: Plan and Acquire Human Resource for Projects 
Session 3: Develop and Manage Project Team 
Session 4: Project Communication Management 
Session 5: Plan Communications Management 
Session 6: Manage and Control Communication in Project Management 
 
You are warmly welcome to the sixth unit of our Project 
Management module, which deals with project human resource 
management and project communications management. Session one 
to three discusses project human resource management. Session four to six will also 
elaborate on project communications management. 
 
In this unit, we will explain project human resource management and project 
communications management which contribute to the success of a project. 
 
Objectives 
By the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 
a. Explain Project Human resource Management 
b. Describe how to Plan and Acquire Human Resource for Projects 
c. Discuss how to Develop and Manage Project Team 
d. Explain Project communications Management 
e. Describe how to Plan Communications Management 
f. Discuss how project communications is managed and controlled  
 
I wish you a fruitful encounter in this unit. 
 
 
  
CoDEUCC/Bachelor of Commerce 
  
87  PROJECT HUMAN RESOURCE AND 
COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT 
 
 
UNIT 4 
 
This is a blank sheet for short notes on: 
• Issues that are not clear; and 
• Difficult topics, if any 
 
                                  CoDEUCC/Bachelor of Commerce  88  PROJECT HUMAN RESOURCE AND  
COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT 
 
 
UNIT 4 
SESSION 1 
SESSION 1: PROJECT HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT 
 
You are welcome to session 1 of Unit 4. I suppose you enjoyed the 
previous unit. We now move on to the role human resource 
management play for the success of a project. I hope you will equally enjoy reading it. 
This session introduces human resource management and activities involved, 
importance and challenges of human resource management of a project. 
 
Objectives 
By the end of this session, you should be able to: 
a. Explain Human resource management 
b.  Define the activities involved in Human resource management 
c. Give at least three (3) importance of Human resource management 
d. State at least two (2) challenges of Human resource management 
 
Now read on… 
 
Introduction 
Human resource management is very important in project management. It is the 
management of 